Centre of Forensic Sciences
Technical Information Sheets
Firearms and toolmarks - Suppressor classification

Introduction

The Criminal Code of Canada (CCC) does not provide a definition of a suppressor however Section 84 of the CCC provides the definition that pertains to suppressors as a prohibited device. A prohibited device is “a device or contrivance designed or intended to muffle or stop the sound or report of a firearm”.  It should be noted that the design element is the primary determining factor when evaluating whether or not a device is a prohibited device. The device’s ability to attenuate the sound of a gunshot merely provides additional supporting data.
Examination

Suspected Suppressor Examination

    the examination may include the following:
    identifying the make, model and calibre
    documenting the construction/design
    identifying the components and determining if these are typical of those used in the manufacturing of suppressors
    determining whether there is a suitable firearm that the device may be attached to
    determining the effectiveness of the suspected suppressor
    classification of the item with respect to the Criminal Code of Canada

Interpretation

For classification of a suspected suppressor, possible conclusions are:

    the Item X device is a “Prohibited Device” as defined in Section 84 of the Criminal Code of Canada
    the Item X device is not a “Prohibited Device” as defined in Section 84 of the Criminal Code of Canada

Glossary

Baffles - Components used to restrain the flow of gas generated during the discharge of a firearm, or to prevent the spreading of sound in a particular direction.

Bleed holes - Holes drilled in the barrel of a firearm which permit gases to escape into a chamber or chambers, thereby decreasing the ballistic pressure and reducing the velocity of a bullet to a subsonic speed. May also be referred to as port holes or gas ports.

Expansion Chamber - A contained area for gases to be restrained and expand.

Report - A combination of sounds produced by the discharge of a firearm, including but not limited to mechanical noise, sonic crack, and muzzle blast.

Sound level meter - A device used for acoustic measurements.

Suppressor - A device attached to or integral with the barrel of a firearm, that is designed to reduce the sound of discharge by decreasing the velocity of escaping gases but maintaining a bullet’s high velocity. May also be referred to as a “silencer” however this term is a misnomer as the device does not silence sound, but functions more to suppress the sound.
